README.rst, before:

==========
gallery-dl
==========

*gallery-dl* is a command-line program to download image galleries and
collections from several image hosting sites (see `Supported Sites`_).
It is a cross-platform tool with many configuration options
and powerful filenaming capabilities.


|pypi| |build| |gitter|

.. contents::


Dependencies
============

- Python_ 3.4+
- Requests_

Optional
--------

- FFmpeg_: Pixiv Ugoira to WebM conversion
- youtube-dl_: Video downloads


Installation
============


Pip
---

The stable releases of *gallery-dl* are distributed on PyPI_ and can be
easily installed or upgraded using pip_:

.. code:: bash

    $ python3 -m pip install -U gallery-dl

Installing the latest dev version directly from GitHub can be done with
pip_ as well:

.. code:: bash

    $ python3 -m pip install -U -I --no-deps --no-cache-dir https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/archive/master.tar.gz

Note: Windows users should use :code:`py -3` instead of :code:`python3`.

It is advised to use the latest version of pip_,
including the essential packages :code:`setuptools` and :code:`wheel`.
To ensure these packages are up-to-date, run

.. code:: bash

    $ python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip setuptools wheel


Standalone Executable
---------------------

Prebuilt executable files with a Python interpreter and
required Python packages included are available for

- `Windows <https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/releases/download/v1.17.0/gallery-dl.exe>`__
- `Linux   <https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/releases/download/v1.17.0/gallery-dl.bin>`__

| Executables build from the latest commit can be found at
| https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/actions/workflows/executables.yml


Snap
----

Linux users that are using a distro that is supported by Snapd_ can install *gallery-dl* from the Snap Store:

.. code:: bash

    $ snap install gallery-dl


Chocolatey
----------

Windows users that have Chocolatey_ installed can install *gallery-dl* from the Chocolatey Community Packages repository:

.. code:: powershell

    $ choco install gallery-dl


Scoop
-----

*gallery-dl* is also available in the Scoop_ "main" bucket for Windows users:

.. code:: powershell

    $ scoop install gallery-dl


Usage
=====

To use *gallery-dl* simply call it with the URLs you wish to download images
from:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl [OPTION]... URL...

See also :code:`gallery-dl --help`.


Examples
--------

Download images; in this case from danbooru via tag search for 'bonocho':

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl "https://danbooru.donmai.us/posts?tags=bonocho"


Get the direct URL of an image from a site that requires authentication:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl -g -u "<username>" -p "<password>" "https://seiga.nicovideo.jp/seiga/im3211703"


Filter manga chapters by language and chapter number:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl --chapter-filter "lang == 'fr' and 10 <= chapter < 20" "https://mangadex.org/title/2354/"


| Search a remote resource for URLs and download images from them:
| (URLs for which no extractor can be found will be silently ignored)

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl "r:https://pastebin.com/raw/FLwrCYsT"


If a site's address is nonstandard for its extractor, you can prefix the URL with the
extractor's name to force the use of a specific extractor:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl "tumblr:https://sometumblrblog.example"


Configuration
=============

Configuration files for *gallery-dl* use a JSON-based file format.

| For a (more or less) complete example with options set to their default values,
  see gallery-dl.conf_.
| For a configuration file example with more involved settings and options,
  see gallery-dl-example.conf_.
| A list of all available configuration options and their
  descriptions can be found in configuration.rst_.
|

*gallery-dl* searches for configuration files in the following places:

Windows:
    * ``%APPDATA%\gallery-dl\config.json``
    * ``%USERPROFILE%\gallery-dl\config.json``
    * ``%USERPROFILE%\gallery-dl.conf``

    (``%USERPROFILE%`` usually refers to the user's home directory,
    i.e. ``C:\Users\<username>\``)

Linux, macOS, etc.:
    * ``/etc/gallery-dl.conf``
    * ``${HOME}/.config/gallery-dl/config.json``
    * ``${HOME}/.gallery-dl.conf``

Values in later configuration files will override previous ones.

Command line options will override all related settings in the configuration file(s),
e.g. using ``--write-metadata`` will enable writing metadata using the default values
for all ``postprocessors.metadata.*`` settings, overriding any specific settings in
configuration files.


Authentication
==============

Username & Password
-------------------

Some extractors require you to provide valid login credentials in the form of
a username & password pair. This is necessary for
``nijie`` and ``seiga``
and optional for
``aryion``,
``danbooru``,
``e621``,
``exhentai``,
``idolcomplex``,
``imgbb``,
``inkbunny``,
``instagram``,
``mangoxo``,
``pinterest``,
``sankaku``,
``subscribestar``,
``tsumino``,
and ``twitter``.

You can set the necessary information in your configuration file
(cf. gallery-dl.conf_)

.. code:: json

    {
        "extractor": {
            "seiga": {
                "username": "<username>",
                "password": "<password>"
            }
        }
    }

or you can provide them directly via the
:code:`-u/--username` and :code:`-p/--password` or via the
:code:`-o/--option` command-line options

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl -u <username> -p <password> URL
    $ gallery-dl -o username=<username> -o password=<password> URL


Cookies
-------

For sites where login with username & password is not possible due to
CAPTCHA or similar, or has not been implemented yet, you can use the
cookies from a browser login session and input them into *gallery-dl*.

This can be done via the
`cookies <https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/blob/master/docs/configuration.rst#extractorcookies>`__
option in your configuration file by specifying

- | the path to a Mozilla/Netscape format cookies.txt file exported by a browser addon
  | (e.g. `Get cookies.txt <https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/get-cookiestxt/bgaddhkoddajcdgocldbbfleckgcbcid/>`__ for Chrome,
    `Export Cookies <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/export-cookies-txt/>`__ for Firefox)

- | a list of name-value pairs gathered from your browser's web developer tools
  | (in `Chrome <https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/storage/cookies>`__,
     in `Firefox <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools/Storage_Inspector>`__)

For example:

.. code:: json

    {
        "extractor": {
            "instagram": {
                "cookies": "$HOME/path/to/cookies.txt"
            },
            "patreon": {
                "cookies": {
                    "session_id": "K1T57EKu19TR49C51CDjOJoXNQLF7VbdVOiBrC9ye0a"
                }
            }
        }
    }

You can also specify a cookies.txt file with
the :code:`--cookies` command-line option:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl --cookies "$HOME/path/to/cookies.txt" URL


OAuth
-----

*gallery-dl* supports user authentication via OAuth_ for
``deviantart``, ``flickr``, ``reddit``, ``smugmug``, ``tumblr``,
and ``mastodon`` instances.
This is mostly optional, but grants *gallery-dl* the ability
to issue requests on your account's behalf and enables it to access resources
which would otherwise be unavailable to a public user.

To link your account to *gallery-dl*, start by invoking it with
``oauth:<sitename>`` as an argument. For example:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl oauth:flickr

You will be sent to the site's authorization page and asked to grant read
access to *gallery-dl*. Authorize it and you will be shown one or more
"tokens", which should be added to your configuration file.

To authenticate with a ``mastodon`` instance, run *gallery-dl* with
``oauth:mastodon:<instance>`` as argument. For example:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl oauth:mastodon:pawoo.net
    $ gallery-dl oauth:mastodon:https://mastodon.social/



.. _gallery-dl.conf:         https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/blob/master/docs/gallery-dl.conf
.. _gallery-dl-example.conf: https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/blob/master/docs/gallery-dl-example.conf
.. _configuration.rst:       https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/blob/master/docs/configuration.rst
.. _Supported Sites:         https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/blob/master/docs/supportedsites.rst

.. _Python:     https://www.python.org/downloads/
.. _PyPI:       https://pypi.org/
.. _pip:        https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/
.. _Requests:   https://requests.readthedocs.io/en/master/
.. _FFmpeg:     https://www.ffmpeg.org/
.. _youtube-dl: https://ytdl-org.github.io/youtube-dl/
.. _pyOpenSSL:  https://pyopenssl.org/
.. _Snapd:      https://docs.snapcraft.io/installing-snapd
.. _OAuth:      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OAuth
.. _Chocolatey: https://chocolatey.org/install
.. _Scoop:      https://scoop.sh

.. |pypi| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/gallery-dl.svg
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/gallery-dl/

.. |build| image:: https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/workflows/tests/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/actions

.. |gitter| image:: https://badges.gitter.im/gallery-dl/main.svg
    :target: https://gitter.im/gallery-dl/main

Commit message:

adding info about fork and install url

README.rst, after:

==========
gallery-dl
==========

*gallery-dl* is a command-line program to download image galleries and
collections from several image hosting sites (see `Supported Sites`_).
It is a cross-platform tool with many configuration options
and powerful filenaming capabilities.

Info about fork:
  - Customized path handling (own custom paths depending on source url)
  - Own code for tbib.

|pypi| |build| |gitter|

.. contents::


Dependencies
============

- Python_ 3.4+
- Requests_

Optional
--------

- FFmpeg_: Pixiv Ugoira to WebM conversion
- youtube-dl_: Video downloads


Installation
============


Pip
---

The stable releases of *gallery-dl* are distributed on PyPI_ and can be
easily installed or upgraded using pip_:

.. code:: bash

    $ python3 -m pip install -U gallery-dl

You can install this fork with:

.. code:: bash

    $ python3 -m pip install git+https://github.com/styler00dollar/gallery-dl.git

Installing the latest dev version directly from GitHub can be done with
pip_ as well:

.. code:: bash

    $ python3 -m pip install -U -I --no-deps --no-cache-dir https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/archive/master.tar.gz

Note: Windows users should use :code:`py -3` instead of :code:`python3`.

It is advised to use the latest version of pip_,
including the essential packages :code:`setuptools` and :code:`wheel`.
To ensure these packages are up-to-date, run

.. code:: bash

    $ python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip setuptools wheel


Standalone Executable
---------------------

Prebuilt executable files with a Python interpreter and
required Python packages included are available for

- `Windows <https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/releases/download/v1.17.0/gallery-dl.exe>`__
- `Linux   <https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/releases/download/v1.17.0/gallery-dl.bin>`__

| Executables build from the latest commit can be found at
| https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/actions/workflows/executables.yml


Snap
----

Linux users that are using a distro that is supported by Snapd_ can install *gallery-dl* from the Snap Store:

.. code:: bash

    $ snap install gallery-dl


Chocolatey
----------

Windows users that have Chocolatey_ installed can install *gallery-dl* from the Chocolatey Community Packages repository:

.. code:: powershell

    $ choco install gallery-dl


Scoop
-----

*gallery-dl* is also available in the Scoop_ "main" bucket for Windows users:

.. code:: powershell

    $ scoop install gallery-dl


Usage
=====

To use *gallery-dl* simply call it with the URLs you wish to download images
from:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl [OPTION]... URL...

See also :code:`gallery-dl --help`.


Examples
--------

Download images; in this case from danbooru via tag search for 'bonocho':

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl "https://danbooru.donmai.us/posts?tags=bonocho"


Get the direct URL of an image from a site that requires authentication:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl -g -u "<username>" -p "<password>" "https://seiga.nicovideo.jp/seiga/im3211703"


Filter manga chapters by language and chapter number:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl --chapter-filter "lang == 'fr' and 10 <= chapter < 20" "https://mangadex.org/title/2354/"


| Search a remote resource for URLs and download images from them:
| (URLs for which no extractor can be found will be silently ignored)

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl "r:https://pastebin.com/raw/FLwrCYsT"


If a site's address is nonstandard for its extractor, you can prefix the URL with the
extractor's name to force the use of a specific extractor:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl "tumblr:https://sometumblrblog.example"


Configuration
=============

Configuration files for *gallery-dl* use a JSON-based file format.

| For a (more or less) complete example with options set to their default values,
  see gallery-dl.conf_.
| For a configuration file example with more involved settings and options,
  see gallery-dl-example.conf_.
| A list of all available configuration options and their
  descriptions can be found in configuration.rst_.
|

*gallery-dl* searches for configuration files in the following places:

Windows:
    * ``%APPDATA%\gallery-dl\config.json``
    * ``%USERPROFILE%\gallery-dl\config.json``
    * ``%USERPROFILE%\gallery-dl.conf``

    (``%USERPROFILE%`` usually refers to the user's home directory,
    i.e. ``C:\Users\<username>\``)

Linux, macOS, etc.:
    * ``/etc/gallery-dl.conf``
    * ``${HOME}/.config/gallery-dl/config.json``
    * ``${HOME}/.gallery-dl.conf``

Values in later configuration files will override previous ones.

Command line options will override all related settings in the configuration file(s),
e.g. using ``--write-metadata`` will enable writing metadata using the default values
for all ``postprocessors.metadata.*`` settings, overriding any specific settings in
configuration files.


Authentication
==============

Username & Password
-------------------

Some extractors require you to provide valid login credentials in the form of
a username & password pair. This is necessary for
``nijie`` and ``seiga``
and optional for
``aryion``,
``danbooru``,
``e621``,
``exhentai``,
``idolcomplex``,
``imgbb``,
``inkbunny``,
``instagram``,
``mangoxo``,
``pinterest``,
``sankaku``,
``subscribestar``,
``tsumino``,
and ``twitter``.

You can set the necessary information in your configuration file
(cf. gallery-dl.conf_)

.. code:: json

    {
        "extractor": {
            "seiga": {
                "username": "<username>",
                "password": "<password>"
            }
        }
    }

or you can provide them directly via the
:code:`-u/--username` and :code:`-p/--password` or via the
:code:`-o/--option` command-line options

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl -u <username> -p <password> URL
    $ gallery-dl -o username=<username> -o password=<password> URL


Cookies
-------

For sites where login with username & password is not possible due to
CAPTCHA or similar, or has not been implemented yet, you can use the
cookies from a browser login session and input them into *gallery-dl*.

This can be done via the
`cookies <https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/blob/master/docs/configuration.rst#extractorcookies>`__
option in your configuration file by specifying

- | the path to a Mozilla/Netscape format cookies.txt file exported by a browser addon
  | (e.g. `Get cookies.txt <https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/get-cookiestxt/bgaddhkoddajcdgocldbbfleckgcbcid/>`__ for Chrome,
    `Export Cookies <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/export-cookies-txt/>`__ for Firefox)

- | a list of name-value pairs gathered from your browser's web developer tools
  | (in `Chrome <https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/storage/cookies>`__,
     in `Firefox <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools/Storage_Inspector>`__)

For example:

.. code:: json

    {
        "extractor": {
            "instagram": {
                "cookies": "$HOME/path/to/cookies.txt"
            },
            "patreon": {
                "cookies": {
                    "session_id": "K1T57EKu19TR49C51CDjOJoXNQLF7VbdVOiBrC9ye0a"
                }
            }
        }
    }

You can also specify a cookies.txt file with
the :code:`--cookies` command-line option:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl --cookies "$HOME/path/to/cookies.txt" URL


OAuth
-----

*gallery-dl* supports user authentication via OAuth_ for
``deviantart``, ``flickr``, ``reddit``, ``smugmug``, ``tumblr``,
and ``mastodon`` instances.
This is mostly optional, but grants *gallery-dl* the ability
to issue requests on your account's behalf and enables it to access resources
which would otherwise be unavailable to a public user.

To link your account to *gallery-dl*, start by invoking it with
``oauth:<sitename>`` as an argument. For example:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl oauth:flickr

You will be sent to the site's authorization page and asked to grant read
access to *gallery-dl*. Authorize it and you will be shown one or more
"tokens", which should be added to your configuration file.

To authenticate with a ``mastodon`` instance, run *gallery-dl* with
``oauth:mastodon:<instance>`` as argument. For example:

.. code:: bash

    $ gallery-dl oauth:mastodon:pawoo.net
    $ gallery-dl oauth:mastodon:https://mastodon.social/



.. _gallery-dl.conf:         https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/blob/master/docs/gallery-dl.conf
.. _gallery-dl-example.conf: https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/blob/master/docs/gallery-dl-example.conf
.. _configuration.rst:       https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/blob/master/docs/configuration.rst
.. _Supported Sites:         https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/blob/master/docs/supportedsites.rst

.. _Python:     https://www.python.org/downloads/
.. _PyPI:       https://pypi.org/
.. _pip:        https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/
.. _Requests:   https://requests.readthedocs.io/en/master/
.. _FFmpeg:     https://www.ffmpeg.org/
.. _youtube-dl: https://ytdl-org.github.io/youtube-dl/
.. _pyOpenSSL:  https://pyopenssl.org/
.. _Snapd:      https://docs.snapcraft.io/installing-snapd
.. _OAuth:      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OAuth
.. _Chocolatey: https://chocolatey.org/install
.. _Scoop:      https://scoop.sh

.. |pypi| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/gallery-dl.svg
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/gallery-dl/

.. |build| image:: https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/workflows/tests/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/actions

.. |gitter| image:: https://badges.gitter.im/gallery-dl/main.svg
    :target: https://gitter.im/gallery-dl/main
